Milestone 2 update (#90)
matter-labs/zksync-web-v2-docs: docs/dev/zksync-v2/aa.md

::: warning Unstable feature

This is the test release of account abstraction (AA) on zkSync 2.0. We are very happy to hear your feedback! Please note: **breaking changes to the API/interfaces required for AA should be anticipated.**

zkSync 2.0 is one of the first EVM-compatible chains to adopt AA, so this testnet is also used to see how "classical" projects from EVM chains can coexist with the account abstraction feature.

:::

## Design

The account abstraction protocol on zkSync is in spirit very similar to [EIP4337](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4337), though our protocol is still different for the sake of efficiency and better UX.

### IAccount interface

> Each account is recommended to implement the [IAccount](https://github.com/matter-labs/v2-testnet-contracts/blob/main/zksync/system-contracts/interfaces/IAccount.sol) interface. It contains the following five methods:

Author: I think both are fine, but "recommended to implement" sounds better IMHO

> Each account is recommended to implement the [IAccount](https://github.com/matter-labs/v2-testnet-contracts/blob/main/zksync/system-contracts/interfaces/IAccount.sol) interface. It contains the following five methods:

Reviewer: your call

- `executeTransaction` is mandatory and will be called by the system after the fee is charged from the user. This function should perform the execution of the transaction.
- `payForTransaction` is optional and will be called by the system if the transaction has no paymaster, i.e. the account is willing to pay for the transaction. This method should be used to pay for the fees by the account. Note, that if your account will never pay any fees and will always rely on the [paymaster](#paymasters) feature, you don't have to implement this method. This method must send at least `tx.gasprice * tx.ergsLimit` ETH to the [bootloader](./system-contracts.md#bootloader) address.
- `prePaymaster` is optional and will be called by the system if the transaction has a paymaster, i.e. there is someone else who will pay the transaction fees for the user. This method should be used to prepare for the interaction with the paymaster. One of the notable [examples](#approval-based-paymaster-flow) where it can be helpful is to approve the ERC-20 tokens for the paymaster.

> - `executeTransactionFromOutside`, technically, is not mandatory, but it is _highly encouraged_, since there needs to be some way, in case of priority mode (e.g. when the operator becomes malicious), to be able to start transactions from your account from ``outside'' (basically this is the fallback to the standard Ethereum approach, where an EOA starts transaction from your smart contract).

Reviewer 2: "when operator becomes malicious" is a bit depressing, and I'm not aware of such plans :)
Maybe "if the network can no longer process L2 transactions" or something similarly neutral?

Author: What about "e.g. if the operator is unresponsive"?

Reviewer 2: lgtm

### IPaymaster interface

Like the original EIP4337, our account abstraction protocol supports paymasters: accounts that can compensate for other accounts' transactions execution. You can read more about them [here](#paymasters).

Each paymaster should implement the [IPaymaster](https://github.com/matter-labs/v2-testnet-contracts/blob/main/zksync/system-contracts/interfaces/IPaymaster.sol) interface. It contains the following two methods:

- `validateAndPayForPaymasterTransaction` is mandatory and will be used by the system to determine if the paymaster approves paying for this transaction. If the paymaster is willing to pay for the transaction, this method must send at least `tx.gasprice * tx.ergsLimit` to the operator. It should return the `context` that will be one of the call parameters to the `postOp` method.

> - `postOp` is optional and will be called after the transaction has been executed. Note, that unlike the original EIP4337, there *is no guarantee that this method will be called*. In particular, this method won't be called if the transaction has failed with out of gas error. It takes four parameters: the context returned by the `validateAndPayForPaymasterTransaction` method, the transaction itself, whether the execution of the transaction succeeded, and also the maximum amount of ergs the paymaster might be refunded with. More documentation on refunds will be available once their support is added to zkSync.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `postOp` is optional and will be called after the transaction has been executed. Note, that unlike the original EIP4337, there *is no guarantee that this method will be called*. In particular, this method won't be called if the transaction has failed with `out of gas` error. It takes four parameters: the context returned by the `validateAndPayForPaymasterTransaction` method, the transaction itself, whether the execution of the transaction succeeded, and also the maximum amount of ergs the paymaster might be refunded with. More documentation on refunds will be available once their support is added to zkSync.

### Reserved fields of the `Transaction` struct with special meaning

> Note that each of the methods above accept the [Transaction](https://github.com/matter-labs/v2-testnet-contracts/blob/0e1c95969a2f92974370326e4430f03e417b25e7/l2/system-contracts/TransactionHelper.sol#L15) struct. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that each of the methods above accepts the [Transaction](https://github.com/matter-labs/v2-testnet-contracts/blob/0e1c95969a2f92974370326e4430f03e417b25e7/l2/system-contracts/TransactionHelper.sol#L15) struct.

While some of its fields are self-explanatory, there are also 6 `reserved` fields, the meaning of each is defined by the transaction's type. We decided to not give these fields names, since they might be unneeded in some future transaction types. For now, the convention is:

- `reserved[0]` is the nonce.
- `reserved[1]` is `msg.value` that should be passed with the transaction.

### The transaction flow

Each transaction goes through the following flow:

#### The validation step

> During the validation step, the account should decide whether it accepts the transaction and if so, pay the fees for it. If any of the parts of the validation fails, the account is not charged any fee, and such transaction can not be included in a block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the validation step, the account should decide whether it accepts the transaction and if so, pay the fees for it. If any part of the validation fails, the account is not charged a fee, and such transaction can not be included in a block.

**Step 2 (paymaster).** The system calls the `prePaymaster` method of the sender. If this call does not revert, then the `validateAndPayForPaymasterTransaction` method of the paymaster is called. If it does not revert too, proceed to the third step.

**Step 3.** The system verifies that the bootloader has received at least `tx.ergsPrice * tx.ergsLimit` ETH to the bootloader. If it is the case, the verification is considered complete and we can proceed to the next step.

#### The execution step

The execution step is considered responsible for the actual execution of the transaction and sending the refunds for any unused ergs back to the user. If there is any revert on this step, the transaction is still considered valid and will be included in the block.

**Step 4.** The system calls the `executeTransaction` method of the account.

**Step 5. (only in case the transaction has a paymaster)** The `postOp` method of the paymaster is called. This step should typically be used for refunding the sender the unused ergs in case the paymaster was used to facilitate paying fees in ERC-20 tokens.

### Fees

> In the EIP4337 you can see three types of gas limits: `verificationGas`, `executionGas`, `preVerificationGas`, that describe the gas limit for the different steps of the transaction's inclusion in a block. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In EIP4337 you can see three types of gas limits: `verificationGas`, `executionGas`, `preVerificationGas`, that describe the gas limit for the different steps of the transaction inclusion in a block.

> zkSync has only a single field, `ergsLimit`, that covers the fee for all three. When submitting a transaction make sure that `ergsLimit` is enough to cover verification, paying the fee (the ERC20 transfer mentioned above), and the actual execution itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
zkSync has only a single field, `ergsLimit`, that covers the fee for all three. When submitting a transaction, make sure that `ergsLimit` is enough to cover verification, paying the fee (the ERC20 transfer mentioned above), and the actual execution itself.

By default, calling `estimateGas` adds a constant to cover charging the fee and the signature verification for EOA accounts.

## Extending EIP4337

> To provide DDoS protection for the operator, the original EIP4337 imposes several [restrictions](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4337#simulation) on the validation step of the account. Most of them, especially regarding the forbidden opcodes are still relevant. However, several restrictions have been lifted for better UX.

Reviewer 2: Nit: shouldn't it be just "DoS"? It doesn't have to be distributed, I think.

### Extending the set of slots that belong to a user

In the original EIP, the `validateTransaction` step of the AA allows the account to read only the storage slots of its own. However, there are slots that *semantically* belong to that user but are actually located on another contract’s addresses. A notable example is `ERC20` balance.

This limitation provides DDoS safety by ensuring that the slots used for validation by various accounts *do not overlap*, so there is no need for them to *actually* belong to the account’s storage.

To allow reading the user's ERC20 balance or allowance on the validation step, the following types of slots will be allowed for an account with address `A` on the validation step:

1. Slots that belong to address `A`.
2. Slots `A` on any other address.
3. Slots of type `keccak256(A || X)` on any other address. (to cover `mapping(address => value)`, which is usually used for balance in ERC20 tokens.
4. Slots of type `keccak256(X || OWN)` on any other address, where `OWN` is some slot of the previous (third) type (to cover `mapping(address ⇒ mapping(address ⇒ uint256))` that are usually used for `allowances` in ERC20 tokens.

> ### What could be allowed in the future

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### What could be allowed in the future?

### Sending transactions from an account

> For now, only EIP712 transactions are supported. To submit a transaction from a specific account, you should provide `from` field of the transaction as the address of the sender and `customSignature` field of the `customData` with the signature for the account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For now, only EIP712 transactions are supported. To submit a transaction from a specific account, you should provide the `from` field of the transaction as the address of the sender and the `customSignature` field of the `customData` with the signature for the account.

```ts
import { utils } from "zksync-web3";

// here the `tx` is a `TransactionRequest` object from `zksync-web3` SDK.
// and the zksyncProvider is the `Provider` object from `zksync-web3` SDK connected to zkSync network.
tx.from = aaAddress;
tx.customData = {
  ...tx.customData,
  customSignature: aaSignature,
};
const serializedTx = utils.serialize({ ...tx });

const sentTx = await zksyncProvider.sendTransaction(serializedTx);
```

## Paymasters

> Paymasters are accounts that can compensate for other accounts' transactions. Imagine being able to pay fees for users of your protocol! The other important use-case of paymasters is to facilitate paying fees in ERC20 tokens. While ETH is the main token of zkSync, paymasters can provide the ability to exchange ERC20s to ETH on the fly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Paymasters are accounts that can compensate for other accounts' transactions. Imagine being able to pay fees for users of your protocol! The other important use-case of paymasters is to facilitate paying fees in ERC20 tokens. While ETH is the main token of zkSync, paymasters can provide the ability to exchange ERC20 tokens to ETH on the fly.

If users want to interact with a paymaster, they should provide the non-zero `paymaster` address in their EIP712 transaction. The input data to the paymaster is provided in the `paymasterInput` field of the paymaster.

### Paymaster verification rules

::: warning Not implemented yet

The verification rules are not fully enforced right now. Even if your paymaster works right now, it might stop working in the future if it does not follow the rules below.

:::

Since multiple users should be allowed to access the same paymasters, malicious paymasters *can* do a DoS attack on our system. To work around this, a system similar to the [EIP4337 reputation scoring](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4337#reputation-scoring-and-throttlingbanning-for-paymasters) will be used.

Unlike in the original EIP, paymasters are allowed to touch any storage slots. Also, the paymaster won't be throttled if either of the following is true:

> - More than `X` minutes have passed since the verification has passed on the API nodes. (The exact value of `X` is TBD).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- More than `X` minutes have passed since the verification has passed on the API nodes. (The exact value of `X` will be defined later).
```
